Now that we've had
a chance to give
an overview of the
reactive programming model,
let's talk about the Java
CompletableFutures framework.
This framework provides an
asynchronous and reactive
concurrent programming model.
It supports dependent
actions that
are triggered when asynchronous
operations complete.
And we could often represent
this type of a model
by showing a data-flow diagram.
This data-flow
diagram is actually
something we'll talk about
later in this particular part
of the course, when we
talk about the design
and implementation of our image
crawler application case study.
And I'll just give you
a quick synopsis of this
here, just to kind of
show the concept of data
dependencies and data flow.
So in this particular
approach, we would start by--
we would start our web crawl
for looking for the images that
are available through some
routed URL by getting a start
page asynchronously.
So we take some URL.
We go ahead and asynchronously
find the contents of that page.
That's Task 1.
Task 2 and 3 then depend on
the successful completion
of Task 1.
So when Task 1 completes, when
we get our start-page content,
or HTML content,
at that point, we
can fork off Task 2 and
Task 3 to run in parallel.
And Task 2 will go ahead and
count the number of images
on that page asynchronously.
And Task 3 will count
the images on any
and all hyperlinked
pages reachable
from this page asynchronously.
And both of those tasks
could run in parallel.
And then Task 4 represents
joining the results
of Task 2 and Task 3.
So when Tasks 2 and
3 complete, Task 4
will combine the results
to create the total.
And that will, of course,
also be done, or could
be done, asynchronously.
So that's an example of a
data-flow diagram showing
how we'd do asynchronous
tasks, how we can fork them,
how we can compute
them in parallel,
and how we can join them back
together to get the results.
Here's a pseudo-code
representation
of how you could represent
this data-flow diagram
in the context of Java
CompletableFutures.
So as you can see
up here, and we'll
talk about the icons and
the nomenclature as we go,
we have Task 1, which is get
the start page asynchronously.
And we do that by calling
the supplyAsync method, which
is one of the factory
methods defined
on the CompletableFuture class.
And we give it a start
page, and it asynchronously
downloads that start page.
What supplyAsync
returns is a Future.
And I show this is as
a little table tent
number with the value 8 in it.
And that Future is then
used for Tasks 2 and 3.
You can see that that
little table tent number 8
is used to initiate what
are known as CompletionStage
methods, like thenApplyAsync
or thenComposeAsync.
And these methods
start to run only
when the Future, the
CompletableFuture,
represented by that table tent
number 8 completes Task 1.
So when Task 1 completes,
then the various other tasks,
Tasks 2 and 3, can be forked
off, and they can start to run.
So you can see that they will go
ahead and asynchronously count
the number of images
on a given page, which
is what Task 2 does.
Task 3 will asynchronously
compute the number of images
reachable from this page.
And both of those
asynchronous tasks
also return CompletableFutures,
which I represent
as table tent numbers 1 and 26.
And then you can
see Task 4 below
gets to run when both Task 2
completes and Task 3 completes.
So when the CompletableFuture
represented by table tent
number 1 is done and the
CompletableFuture represented
by table tent
number 26 completes,
then we can combine the results
from the number of images
on the page and the number of
images reachable on the page.
And we can sum them together
to get our final result.
So this is just kind of a
high-level pseudo-code-like way
of showing how these
asynchronous operations can
be forked, chained
together, and joined.
And obviously, we'll talk
a lot more about this
as we go through the
rest of this material.
Something else to
note here is that
the asynchronous operations that
are going to be running here
can execute in parallel
in thread pools.
And the thread pool
that's used can either
be the common ForkJoinPool,
which is the default,
some other ForkJoinPool that
you might define yourself,
or various types of predefined
or user-defined thread
pools-- for example, a
fixed-size thread pool, a cache
thread pool, or any
type of threat pool
you might create using the
ThreadPoolExecutor class
or some other mechanism
you cook up yourself.
So this gives us a
lot of flexibility.
Keep in mind, of course, that
the parallel streams framework
didn't give us this
much flexibility.
We only could use the
common ForkJoinPool.
Something else
I'll mention here,
and we'll cover
this in more detail
towards the end of
the course, it's
possible to combine
CompletableFutures,
sequential streams, and
Java's functional programming
features in order to
be able to provide
very powerful reactive
programming abstractions,
where the streams are used
to manage the overall control
flow, the
CompletableFutures are used
to run the operations
efficiently in parallel,
and the functional
programming features
are used to simplify the
use of various actions
in the form of method references
or lambda expressions.
Another nice property
of CompletableFutures
is there's often no need to do
any explicit synchronization
in your code.
And there's often no need to
have to do any multi-threading.
You don't have to worry
about spawning threads,
starting threads, synchronizing
threads, and so on.
So much as was the case
with parallel streams,
this abstraction away from
these low-level details
alleviates many accidental
and inherent complexities
of concurrent and
parallel programming.
If you do need to protect
the various elements
from corruption
and race conditions
and so on, then you're
often well-advised to use
various Java class
libraries, which
will handle all the locking
that's needed to protect
shared readable state.
A good example would be
things like the I/O classes
for working with files
or the concurrent HashMap
in order to be able to
access concurrent collections
in a thread-safe way.